So there are four main principles
to object oriented programming,
we talked about encapsulation already and
now we're going to talk about inheritance.
So, inheritance is where one class
inherits the members of another class.
So there are two parties
that are involved in
an inheritance relationship,
a parent and a child.
So the parent is known as the super class,
sometimes it's also referred to as
a parent class or a base class.
In this example,
person is our superclass and
then the child is known as the subclass,
this is sometimes referred to as
a subclass or a derived class or
a child class, sorry,
child class or derived class.
And in this example,
the employee is the subclass, all right?
So an inheritance relationship is
known as an is a relationship,
an employee is a person, right?
And being a subclass is
a specialized type of person,
so let's demonstrate
inheritance with code.
We're gonna create a Person class and
then we're gonna create
an Employee class that inherits
from that Person class.
So within our ID,
we'll create a new package,
we'll call this one inheritance.
Inside of here we'll go ahead and
create a Person class.
Now if we think about some
attributes that a person has,
we can come up with things like a name,
maybe an age, right?
And then let's say a gender.
And we can go ahead and
generate the getter and
setter methods for this as well.
Again to generate you would right click,
and
then choose Generate and
then Getter and Setter,
and select all of the fields, all right.
So we have a POJO for a person,
now let's create another class,
make sure you all have this one,
you got it?
Alright, so let's create another
class also under inheritance,
this one we'll call Employee.
And we want the Employee class to
inherit from the Person class.
So to inherit from another class,
within the class's header,
you would specify that this class extends,
extends is the keyword that forms
an inheritance relationship.
And then you would specify what
class this inherits from, so
we can write Person and that's it,
that's all you need to create
this inheritance relationship
between these two classes.
Now everything that is not
private within the Person class,
now also belongs to the Employee class,
it has inherited these things from it.
So, you can inherit from a superclass, but
then remember the subclass is some
specialized version of that class.
So you might have things that
are specific just to an employee, so
we can add anything we want to this.
So we get whatever that we
inherited from our superclass and
then whatever we define for our sales.
So, some attributes for
an employee might be an employeeId.
And maybe a title.
We could go ahead and create the getters
and setters, so we'll generate those.
And great, now we have employee
inherited from person and
then also a couple of attributes and
methods for itself.
Now I want us to test this out,
so we'll create one more class,
and we'll call this one InheritanceTester.
In InheritanceTester,
let's create a main method and
we'll go ahead and
instantiate the Person class.
So we'll say person = new Person.
I have not created any constructors, but
notice I'm able to call to
this default constructor, why?
>> Ghost constructor.
>> Yeah [LAUGH] I think I made that
term up about ghost constructor [LAUGH],
but yes, because Java has implicit
default constructor if you have
not defined any constructors.
Okay, so we have the Person,
right, and then let's go ahead and
make an Employee object.
We'll call him employee = new Employee.
Okay, now notice, if I click,
if I say employee, well,
lemme show you this.
If I say person dot,
the methods that are available
to this person are getAge,
getGender, getName,
setAge, Gender, and Name, all right?
So, if we look in person,
I think I can split this [COUGH].
Okay, nice, okay, so in the person,
this is the Person class on the right,
we have the name, the age,
the gender and in our InheritanceTester,
of course,
we can get those things with person.
But if we look at the employee object and
say, doc,
we have get and set the EmployeeId,
get and set the Title,
which are the things that were
specific to Employee class.
But we also have the GetAge,
the Gender, and the Name,
which are the methods that were
inherited from the Person class.
Does everyone understand,
any questions so far?
Okay, beautiful, all right, so.
Within inheritance constructors
operate a little bit differently,
the constructors in the superclasses
are going to be executed
before the constructors in the subclass,
all right?
So, it makes sense if you think about it,
Java wants to make sure that
before you inherit something and
start executing it, those things
are properly constructed, right?
So it's gonna run the superclass first and
then the subclass.
Let's explore constructors by
adding some to the Person and
the Employee classes, all right?
So back to our Id,
I'm gonna go inside of my Person class
Sorry.
Okay, I'm gonna go inside of Person and
let's go ahead and
create a default constructor here.
So default constructor,
someone give me the syntax.
First word.
>> Public.
>> Public, next word.
>> Person.
>> Person, the exact name of the class,
very good,
no arguments in the default constructor
and we'll just put a print statement
cuz I want you to see where
we are when we execute this.
So we'll just say In Person default
constructor, all right?
And then let's go to the Employee class
and we'll add a constructor there,
so public Employee And
we'll print out In Employee
default constructor.
All right, now, in our
InheritanceTester we'll just run this,
so I want you to see the order
that the constructors run.
So I'm going to actually,
let's just do one at a time.
So let's run the Person
instantiation first, and
of course we should expect to see that
it is in the Person default constructor,
yes, now I'm gonna comment out
that one and run the Employee one.
So if we run Employee,
notice it ran the Person
one first, and then the Employee, okay?
Now we're gonna make another
constructor inside of Person and
this constructor will take a name, so
let's create the second one and
this takes a String name.
And we'll just print out that we're
in In Person 2nd constructor.
All right?
Now, in the Employee class.
If I wanted to.
Not have the default constructor run,
cuz by default,
this Employee constructor is gonna run the
default one from the Person constructor.
But what if I explicitly want to
run one of the other constructors
from the Person class?
Then I would have to specify that myself
in my constructor as the subclass.
All right and to do that,
you make a call to super
All right, so super will call
the constructor that matches
the parameter list, so
in this case, I have no parameters,
this will explicitly call the default
constructor from the Person class.
Now, I was gonna do that anyway,
so this is not necessary,
but if I wanted to call that
second constructor in person,
I would do so by passing in a name.
So you can type in your name there,
and this will call
the constructor that takes a string
in the Parent class, okay?
All right, so
let's run our InheritanceTester with
Employee just to make sure we
understand what's going on.
So it went to the second
constructor of person
first because that's what
we specified to do and
then it implemented anything else.
Now, if you're going to make
an explicit call to super,
it has to be the very first line
of the subclass's constructor.
For example,
I could not move super to after here,
I would get an error and
that makes sense, right?
The parents stayed in
everything needs to be set up
first before you can start
doing things in the subclass.
Does that make sense to everyone?
Okay.
The other thing is if,
let's comment this out for a second, and
let's go back to Person and we're gonna
comment out that default constructor.
Now, if there is no default constructor,
then notice now I get an error in
my subclasses default constructor.
Because it wants to make
the call to that default
constructor from Person whether
I explicitly defined it or not.
And since I added a second
constructor that ghost's default
constructor went away remember.
So there is no constructor now,
no default constructor that
Employee could call, so
I have to explicitly make
a call to a constructor, okay?
Any questions on this?
All right.
>> Can a class have more than one parent?
>> No, so you can only inherit from
one class, one parent, okay?
All right, so,
key points to remember about
constructors when we're
talking about inheritance.
A superclass's constructor is run
before the subclasses constructor,
explicit calls can be made to
the superclasses constructor
from one of the subclasses
constructor by using super.
You'll pass in any arguments you
want to get that right constructor,
if there is an explicit call to
the superclasses constructor,
it must be the first statement
in the subclasses constructor.
And if the superclass doesn't
have a default constructor,
the subclass must explicitly call
one of the other constructors.